CHI 2005 | Late Breaking Results: Short Papers

April 2-7 | Portland, Oregon, USA

Understanding Research Trends in Conferences using
PaperLens
Bongshin Lee 1,2
Mary Czerwinski 2
1
Human-Computer Interaction Lab
Computer Science Department,
University of Maryland,
College Park, MD 20742, USA
{bongshin, bederson}@cs.umd.edu

George Robertson 2
Benjamin B. Bederson 1
2
Microsoft Research
One Microsoft Way
Redmond, WA 98052, USA
{marycz, ggr}@microsoft.com

ABSTRACT

PaperLens is a novel visualization that reveals trends,
connections, and activity throughout a conference
community. It tightly couples views across papers, authors,
and references. PaperLens was developed to visualize 8
years (1995-2002) of InfoVis conference proceedings and
was then extended to visualize 23 years (1982-2004) of the
CHI conference proceedings. This paper describes how we
analyzed the data and designed PaperLens. We also
describe a user study to focus our redesign efforts along
with the design changes we made to address usability issues.
We summarize lessons learned in the process of design and
scaling up to the larger set of CHI conference papers.

trends. A few digital libraries provide some simple,
statistical facts such as the most frequently cited
papers/authors. However, simple analysis often requires
extensive navigation and effort since the results are
provided in the form of a long list.
It is even more difficult to understand how researchers,
topics, and outside research sources interact and influence
research activity in general. Hence, Smeaton et al. [8]
performed a content analysis of papers published in SIGIR
proceedings to understand research trends. Their focus was
to determine what topic areas appear but not to visualize the
results. They also did not include any citation analysis.
In practical terms, we are unable to answer interesting
questions with the current systems such as: Which topics
have come and gone over the last 23 years of CHI? What is
the relationship between a given set of researchers? The
IEEE InfoVis 2004 Conference chose to pose these kinds of
questions about its history as the theme of the InfoVis 2004
Contest [3]. To address the questions, we developed a
visualization called PaperLens, which allows researchers to
see trends and topics in a field, in addition to influential
papers and authors, all within a single screen visualization.

Author Keywords

Information visualization, Evaluation, Brushing, Timeline
views, Piccolo.NET.
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2 User Interfaces---Graphical user interfaces (GUI),
H.5.2 User Interfaces---Evaluation/methodology, H.2.8.
Database Applications---Data mining.
INTRODUCTION

Online digital libraries such as the ACM Digital Library
(DL) [1] provide broad bibliographical and full-text access
to journals and conference proceedings. The ACM DL
shows which papers cite or are cited by a particular
publication. It also lists all colleagues who have ever
published with a particular author. This enables users to
access related papers/authors once they find a desired
paper/author. However, it is often difficult to reconstruct
navigation paths and to remember how a particular
paper/author was found using these tools.

DATA ANALYSIS

The InfoVis 2004 contest chairs provided a dataset
containing metadata for 8 years of InfoVis conference
papers and references. They collected all the available
InfoVis publications and extracted their references by hand.
They found the referenced articles and metadata (if
available) in the ACM DL. Finally, they put everything
together in one XML file. After the contest chairs released
the dataset, other researchers helped them clean up the data.
Once we visualized the InfoVis data, ACM kindly provided
the dataset containing metadata for 23 years of CHI papers.
The dataset included full papers, short papers, demos, and
videos. The reference data was problematic, and only 43%
of the references had a paper identifier assigned. While we
had the complete reference text, we focused on the
visualization, and did not undertake further effort to
improve reference data. However, we did write a simple
Perl script to retrieve the necessary metadata such as paper
source, year of publication, and authors from the ACM DL.

Envision [6] is a digital library augmented with a flexible
user interface that provides a variety of visualization
facilities, allowing users to explore patterns in the literature.
Galaxy and ThemeView introduce visualizations of themes
in document collections [9]. Most existing systems,
however, are not designed to help users understand research
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
CHI 2005, April 2–7, 2005, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 1-59593-002-7/05/0004.

1969

CHI 2005 | Late Breaking Results: Short Papers

April 2-7 | Portland, Oregon, USA
PAPERLENS INTERFACE

To identify research topics, we used standard, internally
developed topic clustering technology. The statistical
model underlying the code is called a mixture model [5].
The technology was originally developed for site
administrators to help build and maintain category
hierarchies. The text-clustering component suggests a set
of categories when no explicit structure exists. We used
titles, references, and keywords in the clustering process. A
standard list of stop words, months of the year, journal and
proceeding titles, and version and page numbers were
removed from influencing the cluster results.

In the popularity of topic view (Figure 1a) we organized
papers by their topic and year. Hence, we can easily
capture trends in the topics. For example, the InfoVis
category (10th from the top) emerged in the late 1980’s and
then has remained steady in terms of publications from the
early 1990’s.
PaperLens enables users to get a list of papers by topic or
by authors. By selecting a topic, the list of all the papers in
that area is shown in the paper list (Figure 1e). It also
provides a way to search for specific papers/authors.

Five InfoVis and 22 CHI clusters emerged from using the
clustering tool. We used PaperLens in the process of
manually naming each cluster by investigating papers and
authors in the cluster. For the CHI data, some topics were
divided into several clusters, which we combined into one
cluster, but we did not move individual papers into other
clusters. This resulted in some papers being placed in odd
clusters but is typical of any clustering solution. We ended
up with the 15 CHI clusters shown in Figure 1.

Selected authors are shown in the selected authors area
(Figure 1b). Once authors are added, their papers are
shown in the paper list and highlighted in the popularity of
topic view, matched to the author by color coding, which
enables users to see in which topic area a particular author
fits. For example, Stuart Card has published mainly in the
InfoVis area, as seen by the red color coding in the
popularity of topic view (Figure 1a). We used black when
selected authors wrote a paper together.

(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1. PaperLens tightly couples views across papers, authors, and references and consists of 6 main parts:
(a) Popularity of Topic (b) Selected Authors (c) Author List (d) Degrees of Separation Links
(e) Paper List (f) Year by Year Top 10 Cited Papers/Authors.

1970

CHI 2005 | Late Breaking Results: Short Papers

April 2-7 | Portland, Oregon, USA

tasks were completed, users were asked to fill out a
questionnaire. All sessions lasted no more than one hour.
Participants received a free lunch for their participation.
The list of the tasks follows.

We show the number of papers published by an author in
the author list (Figure 1c). Users can sort the author list
by the number of papers and see who has published the
most. For example, the most prolific author is Brad
Myers who has published 41 papers.

1) Who published the only paper on Graph
Visualization in 1998?
2) How many papers did S. K. Card publish at InfoVis
over the 8 years in our database?
3) Who were George Robertson’s coauthors on his only
paper in the database?
4) How many degrees of separation exist between S. F.
Roth and S. G. Eick?
5) Which topic area has enjoyed gradual growth over
the last 8 years?
6) Which topic area has all but died out in terms of
papers published on that topic over the last 8 years?
7) Which topic area has had many more papers
published on that topic during the last 2 years in our
database?
8) Which authors are in the top 10 most frequently cited
list but have not published at InfoVis?
9) How many papers of the top 10 most frequently cited
papers are from InfoVis?
10) How many papers in the top 10 most frequently cited
list are from CHI?
11) Which topic area references the most frequently cited
paper most often?
12) Go to the most frequently cited InfoVis paper and
read it’s abstract.
13) In the Dynamic Queries topic area, which author is
the most frequently cited?
14) What was the last year that S. K. Card published in
this database?
15) Who was the most frequently cited author in 2001?
16) How many papers did J. Mackinlay and S. K. Card
publish together at InfoVis over the 8 years in our
database?

One interesting question is “Which papers/authors are
most often referenced?”
In addition to counting
references, we computed them by year and by topic to
show trends. When the user selects a topic from the
popularity of topic view, the year by year top 10 citations
area (Figure 1f) is filtered to show the frequent citations
for that topic area. In this way, the user can quickly
discover the influential papers in a particular topic area.
Ranking the frequent citations by author shows frequently
cited authors. For End User Programming, Brad Myers
was the most frequently cited author. Selecting an author
from the year by year top 10 cited authors view shows
papers that the selected author has published in CHI, and
papers that have referenced them, using orange
highlighting in the popularity of topic area. The user can
immediately discover areas most influenced by the
selected author.
A co-author collaboration graph is often used to find the
relationship between authors [8]. The graph among CHI
authors, however, is too fragmented to give useful
insights. Instead, we display the shortest path between
two authors by co-authorship in the degrees of separation
links view (Figure 1d). For example, Card and Myers are
connected indirectly to each other because they have each
co-authored a paper with Shneiderman.
PaperLens was implemented in C# and runs on any
standard Windows PC. All the graphical views are
implemented with Piccolo.NET, a shared source toolkit
that supports scalable structured 2D graphics [2,7].
USER STUDY

A user study was carried out using the InfoVis dataset and
the first iteration prototype [4].
Eight researchers
(including 1 pilot subject) were recruited. Four of the
researchers were computer science graduate student
interns, and four were full time researchers, and all were
interested and actively working in the area of HCI. Ages
ranged from 24 to 42. The pilot data is included only in
the discussion of the usability issues observed.

Results

Participants were given a brief tutorial, spending no
longer than 20 minutes interacting with the system. This
segment of the study was considered “think aloud”, and
usability issues they experienced during this walk through
of the system were noted by the experimenter.

Average task times were fast, with only the last task
taking much longer (65 seconds, on average). This task
was to figure out how many papers Mackinlay and Card
published together at InfoVis, which required users to
remember that black color coding was used to signify
multiple co-authors. Most tasks were performed in less
than 20 seconds.

Overall, participants were able to correctly answer the
tasks used in the study 97% of the time. There were only
5 incorrect answers provided out of a possible 112
questions across participants. Three participants each
gave one wrong answer and one participant incorrectly
answered 2 questions. Incorrect answer times were not
included in the task time analysis.

Next, the participants were asked to carry out 16 tasks,
which were timed and scored for correctness. All users
carried the tasks out sequentially, as quickly as they were
able. Once a task was over, participants were allowed to
discuss what did or did not work well. Once all of the

Several usability issues needed to be addressed through
design iteration. These issues were prioritized based on
how many participants encountered them and the severity

1971

CHI 2005 | Late Breaking Results: Short Papers

April 2-7 | Portland, Oregon, USA

to the cursor. The fisheye technique did not work because
the number of papers for which we could show titles in
one column was less than 70, and we needed to show as
many as 150.

of the issue based on how long the issue delayed finding
an answer. The highest priority issues centered on
searching for authors: in this prototype a string-based
search did not allow the user to search for first or last
names separately, and found substring matches anywhere
in the name. We addressed this by providing columns for
the first and last name, in addition to fixing the way
substring matches worked.

Some users were concerned with the number of different
colors in the original user interface. For the CHI data, the
maximum number of authors is 15. We suspected that it
would not be useful to have 15 different colors to
distinguish authors. We used a single color if the number
of selected authors is larger than 4.

Several high priority issues were observed where our
system did not behave “symmetrically”. If you could
launch a paper from one list view, you should be able to
open it from any list view. All symmetry issues have
been addressed in the redesigned system.

FUTURE WORK

We are planning to examine ways to scale the
visualization to a much larger dataset of documents such
as ACM DL with many other kinds of metadata. In
addition, it would be interesting to explore showing richer
relationships among more than two authors.

Finally, some users thought the originally separated
degrees of separation list and links views were
“recreational” and took up too much screen real estate.
To help alleviate usability issues in this area we combined
the list and links views into one view (now called degrees
of separation links) and allowed the user to pick the
degrees of separation between any selected author and
related people.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank the InfoVis 2004 contest chairs,
Jean-Daniel Fekete, Georges Grinstein and Catherine
Plaisant and the ACM for providing the data. Chris Meek
and Susan Dumais helped with clustering solutions. We
also thank Aaron Clamage who ported Piccolo from Java
to .NET, and the user study participants.

LESSONS LEARNED

We learned two core things in the design and use of
PaperLens. The first is that sometimes simple is good.
Our initial thoughts were to build a graph visualization
tool to show all the data and relationships at once. But we
suspected viewing too much information could be
overwhelming. Furthermore, there is no efficient way to
show topic trends with graph visualizations.

REFERENCES

1. ACM Digital Library. http://portal.acm.org
2. Bederson, B.B., Grosjean, J., and Meyer, J. (2004)
Toolkit Design for Interactive Structured Graphics.
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, Vol. 30,
No. 8, 535-546.

We instead opted for a simpler design with an abstract
overview of the full dataset but not with all relationships
visible. We also designed around several simple tightly
coupled views which provide powerful capabilities
together. While these design ideas have appeared before,
PaperLens brings them together in a unique fashion. To
summarize, key elements of the PaperLens design are: a)
an abstract overview; b) multiple small and simple
components to best show the different aspects of the data;
c) relationships shown through interactivity and tightly
coupled components; and d) all visual elements are laid
out along axes with well defined metrics.

3. InfoVis 2004 Contest: The History of InfoVis
http://www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/iv04contest.
4. Lee, B., Czerwinski, M., Robertson, G., and Bederson,
B.B. (2004) Understanding Eight Years of InfoVis
Conferences Using PaperLens. Posters Compendium
of InfoVis 2004, 53-54.
5. McLachlan, G.J. and Basford, K.E. (1988) Mixture
Models. Marcel Dekker, New York.
6. Nowell, L.T., France, R.K., and Hix, D. (1997)
Exploring Search Results with Envision. Extended
Abstracts of CHI 1997, ACM Press, 14-15.

The second thing we learned pertains to issues in scaling
up the visualization. For the InfoVis data, which has only
155 papers, we could use a square to represent each paper.
This enabled the user to select a paper by a single click.
A fisheye technique helped users reveal individual paper
titles for a selected year by topic. However, when we
tried a similar approach for the CHI data, the height of the
rectangle was too small. So, we rendered each rectangle 4
pixels high, and raised highlighted rectangles to the front.
However, when several papers are highlighted, rectangles
sometimes overlap, causing them to shift one pixel to the
right. Overlapping made it difficult to select a paper, so
we provided a pop-up list menu showing the papers close

7. Piccolo.NET. http://www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/piccolo
8. Smeaton, A.F., Keogh, G., Gurrin, C., McDonald, K.,
and Sødring, T. (2003) Analysis of papers from
twenty-five years of SIGIR conferences: what have we
been doing for the last quarter of a century? ACM
SIGIR Forum, 49-53.
9. Wong, P.C., Hetzler, B., Posse, C., Whiting, M.,
Havre, S., Cramer, N., Shah, A., Singhal, M., Turner,
A., and Thomas, J. (2004) IN-SPIRE InfoVis 2004
Contest Entry. Posters Compendium of InfoVis 2004,
51-52.

1972

